<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<chapter id="Parse_Directives">
  <title>Parse Directives</title>

  <para>Qore supports the use of parse directives in order to set parsing options, load modules, control warnings, and include other files.  Parse directives that set parsing options can be used any time parse options have not been locked on a Program object.  They are used most often when it's not possible or desirable to set the parse options in the qore command-line.</para>

  <table>
    <title>Parse Directives</title>
    <tgroup cols='2' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
      <thead>
	<row>
	  <entry><para>Directive</para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Description</para></entry>
	</row>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="allow-bare-refs">%allow-bare-refs</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry>
	    <para>Prohibits the use of the <code>'$'</code> character in variable names, method calls, and object member references.  This makes Qore scripts appear superficially more like C++ or Java programs.  This parse option is set by default with <code><link linkend="new-style">%new-style</link></code>.</para>
	  <para>Name resolution is made in the following order when this option is set: local variables, class constants and static class vars (when parsing in class code), global variables, and (non-class) constants.</para>
	    <para>Note that <link linkend="Implicit_Arguments">implicit arguments</link> are still referenced with the <code>'$'</code> character even when this parse option is set.</para>
	    <para>Since Qore 0.8.1.</para>
	  </entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="assume-local">%assume-local</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry>
	    <para>Assume local variable scope when variables are first referenced if no <command>my</command> or <command>our</command> is present.  When used with <code><link linkend="allow-bare-refs">%allow-bare-refs</link></code>, local variables without <command>my</command> must be declared with a data type restriction (can be <code><link linkend="any_type">any</link></code>).  This parse option is set by default with <code><link linkend="new-style">%new-style</link></code></para>
	    <para>Since Qore 0.8.1.</para>
	  </entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="disable-all-warnings">%disable-all-warnings</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Turns off all warnings</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="disable-warning">%disable-warning</link></code> <replaceable>warning-code</replaceable></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disables the named warning until <code>%enable-warning</code> is encountered with the same code or <code>%enable-all-warnings</code> is encountered</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="enable-all-warnings">%enable-all-warnings</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Turns on all warnings</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="enable-warning">%enable-warning</link></code> <replaceable>warning-code</replaceable></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Enables the named warning.</para></entry>
	</row>
 	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="exec-class">%exec-class</link></code> <replaceable>class name</replaceable></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Instantiates the named class as the application class.  Also turns on <code>%no-top-level</code>.  If the program is read from stdin or from the command-line, an argument must be given specifying the class name.</para></entry>
	</row>

	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="include">%include</link></code> <replaceable>file_name</replaceable></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Starts parsing <replaceable>file_name</replaceable> immediately.  Parsing resumes with the current input after <replaceable>file_name</replaceable> has been completely parsed.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="lock-options">%lock-options</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Prohibits further changes to parse options (equivalent to the <code>--lock-options</code> command-line option).</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="lock-warnings">%lock-warnings</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Prohibits further changes to the warning mask (equivalent to the <code>--lock-warnings</code> command-line option).</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="new-style">%new-style</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry>
	    <para>Sets both <code><link linkend="allow-bare-refs">%allow-bare-refs</link></code> and <code><link linkend="assume-local">%assume-local</link></code>.  These two options together make programming in Qore superficially more like programming in C++ or Java programs; use this if you dislike programming with the <code>'$'</code> sign, for example.</para>
	    <para>Since Qore 0.8.1.</para>
	  </entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-class-defs">%no-class-defs</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows class definitions.  Equivalent to <code><link linkend="PO_NO_CLASS_DEFS">PO_NO_CLASS_DEFS</link></code> and the <code>--no-class-defs</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-child-restrictions">%no-child-restrictions</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Allows child program objects to have parse option restrictions that are not a strict subset of the parents'.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_CHILD_PO_RESTRICTIONS">PO_NO_CHILD_PO_RESTRICTIONS</link></code> and the <code>--no-child-restrictions</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-constant-defs">%no-constant-defs</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows constant definitions.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_CONSTANT_DEFS">PO_NO_CONSTANT_DEFS</link></code> and the <code>--no-constant-defs</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-database">%no-database</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to database functionality (for example the <link linkend="Datasource_Class">Datasource class</link>.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_DATABASE">PO_NO_DATABASE</link></code> and the <code>--no-database</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-external-info">%no-external-info</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows any access to functionality that provides external information (see <code><link linkend="no-external-info">%no-external-info</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_EXTERNAL_INFO">PO_NO_EXTERNAL_INFO</link></code> and the <code>--no-external-info</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-external-process">%no-external-process</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows any access to external processes (see <code><link linkend="no-external-process">%no-external-process</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_EXTERNAL_PROCESS">PO_NO_EXTERNAL_PROCESS</link></code> and the <code>--no-external-process</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-filesystem">%no-filesystem</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to the local filesystem.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_FILESYSTEM">PO_NO_FILESYSTEM</link></code> and the <code>--no-filesystem</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-global-vars">%no-global-vars</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows the use of global variables.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_GLOBAL_VARS">PO_NO_GLOBAL_VARS</link></code> and the <code>--no-global-vars</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-gui">%no-gui</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows functionality that draws graphics to the display.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_GUI">PO_NO_GUI</link></code> and the <code>-pno-gui</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-locale-control">%no-locale-control</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to functionality that changes locale information (see <code><link linkend="no-locale-control">%no-locale-control</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_LOCALE_CONTROL">PO_NO_LOCALE_CONTROL</link></code> and the <code>--no-locale-control</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-namespace-defs">%no-namespace-defs</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows new namespace definitions.  Equivalent to <code><link linkend="PO_NO_NAMESPACE_DEFS">PO_NO_NAMESPACE_DEFS</link></code> and the <code>--no-namespace-defs</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-network">%no-network</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to the network.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_NETWORK">PO_NO_NETWORK</link></code> and the <code>--no-network</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-new">%no-new</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows use of the <command>new</command> operator.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_NEW">PO_NO_NEW</link></code> and the <code>--no-new</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-process-control">%no-process-control</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to functions that would affect the current process (see <code><link linkend="no-process-control">%no-process-control</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_PROCESS_CONTROL">PO_NO_PROCESS_CONTROL</link></code> and the <code>--no-process-control</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-subroutine-defs">%no-subroutine-defs</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows subroutine (function) definitions.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_SUBROUTINE_DEFS">PO_NO_SUBROUTINE_DEFS</link></code> and the <code>--no-subroutine-defs</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>

	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-terminal-io">%no-terminal-io</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to terminal I/O (see <code><link linkend="no-terminal-io">%no-terminal-io</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_TERMINAL_IO">PO_NO_TERMINAL_IO</link></code> and the <code>-pno-terminal-io</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>

	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-thread-classes">%no-thread-classes</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to thread classes (see <code><link linkend="no-thread-classes">%no-thread-classes</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREAD_CLASSES">PO_NO_THREAD_CLASSES</link></code> and the <code>--no-thread-classes</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-thread-control">%no-thread-control</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to thread control operations (see <code><link linkend="no-thread-control">%no-thread-control</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREAD_CONTROL">PO_NO_THREAD_CONTROL</link></code> and the <code>--no-thread-control</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-thread-info">%no-thread-info</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows any access to functionality that provides threading information (see <code><link linkend="no-thread-info">%no-thread-info</link></code> for a list of features not available with this parse option).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREAD_INFO">PO_NO_THREAD_INFO</link></code> and the <code>--no-thread-info</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-threads">%no-threads</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows access to all thread control operations and thread classes (equivalent to <code>--no-thread-control</code> and <code>--no-thread-classes</code> together).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREADS">PO_NO_THREADS</link></code> and the <code>--no-threads</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="no-top-level">%no-top-level</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Disallows top level code.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_NO_TOP_LEVEL_STATEMENTS">PO_NO_TOP_LEVEL_STATEMENTS</link></code> and the <code>--no-top-level</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="require-our">%require-our</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Requires global variables to be declared with <command>our</command> prior to use (like perl's <code>use strict vars</code> pragma).  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_REQUIRE_OUR">PO_REQUIRE_OUR</link></code> and the <code>--require-our</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="require-prototypes">%require-prototypes</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Requires <link linkend="Data_Type_Declarations">type declarations</link> for all function and method parameters and return types.  Variables and object members do not need to have type declarations.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_REQUIRE_PROTOTYPES">PO_REQUIRE_PROTOTYPES</link></code> and the <code>--require-prototypes</code> command-line option.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="require-types">%require-types</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Requires <link linkend="Data_Type_Declarations">type declarations</link> for all function and method parameters, return types, variables, and object members.  Equivalent to parse option <code><link linkend="PO_REQUIRE_TYPES">PO_REQUIRE_TYPES</link></code> and the <code>--require-types</code> command-line option.  Implies also <link linkend="strict-args">%strict-args</link>.</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="requires">%requires</link></code> <replaceable>feature [&lt;|&lt;=|=|&gt;=|&gt; &lt;version&gt;]</replaceable></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>If the named feature is not already present in Qore, then the <code>QORE_MODULE_DIR</code> environment variable is used to provide a list of directories to seach for a module with the same name (<replaceable>feature</replaceable><code>.qmod</code>).  If the module is not found, then the qore default module directory is checked.  This directive must be used to load modules providing parse support (i.e. modules providing classes, constants, functions, etc that are resolved at parse time).  If version information is provided, then it is compared with the module's version information, and if it does not match a parse exception is raised.  See also <link linkend="load_module">load_module()</link> for a run-time module loading.</para>
</entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="set-time-zone">%set-time-zone</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Sets the time zone for the current program from a UTC offset (with format +/-[00[:00[:00]]; ':' characters are optional) or a time zone region name (ex: 'Europe/Prague').</para></entry>
	</row>
	<row>
	  <entry><para><code><link linkend="strict-args">%strict-args</link></code></para></entry>
	  <entry><para>Prohibits access to builtin functions and methods flagged with <code><link linkend="RT_NOOP_flag">RT_NOOP</link></code> and also causes errors to be raised if excess arguments are given to functions that do not access excess arguments.</para></entry>
	</row>
      </tbody>
    </tgroup>
  </table>

  <sect1 id="allow-bare-refs">
    <title>allow-bare-refs</title>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%allow-bare-refs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--allow-bare-refs, -B</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>PO_ALLOW_BARE_REFS</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Prohibits the use of the <code>'$'</code> character in variable names, method calls, and object member references.  This makes Qore scripts appear superficially more like C++ or Java programs.  This parse option is set by default with <code><link linkend="new-style">%new-style</link></code>.</para>
	  <para>Name resolution is made in the following order when this option is set: local variables, class constants and static class vars (when parsing in class code), global variables, and (non-class) constants.</para>
	  <para>Note that <link linkend="Implicit_Arguments">implicit arguments</link> are still referenced with the <code>'$'</code> character even when this parse option is set.</para>
	  <para>Since Qore 0.8.1.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="assume-local">
    <title>assume-local</title>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%assume-local</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--assume-local</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>PO_ASSUME_LOCAL</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Assume local variable scope when variables are first referenced if no <command>my</command> or <command>our</command> is present.  When used with <code><link linkend="allow-bare-refs">%allow-bare-refs</link></code>, local variables without <command>my</command> must be declared with a data type restriction (can be <code><link linkend="any_type">any</link></code>).  This parse option is set by default with <code><link linkend="new-style">%new-style</link></code></para>
	  <para>Since Qore 0.8.1.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="disable-all-warnings">
    <title>disable-all-warnings</title>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%disable-all-warnings</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>none, warnings are disabled by default</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disables all warnings while parsing.  See <link linkend="Warnings">Warnings</link> for more information.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>

  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="disable-warning">
    <title>disable-warning</title>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%disable-warning</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>none, warnings are disabled by default</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disables the named warning while parsing.  See <link linkend="Warnings">Warnings</link> for more information.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="enable-all-warnings">
    <title>enable-all-warnings</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%enable-all-warnings</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--enable-all-warnings, -W</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Enables all warnings while parsing.  See <link linkend="Warnings">Warnings</link> for more information.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="enable-warning">
    <title>enable-warning</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%enable-warning</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--enable-warning, -w</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Enables the named warning while parsing.  See <link linkend="Warnings">Warnings</link> for more information.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="exec-class">
    <title>exec-class</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%exec-class</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--exec-class, -x</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Executes the named class as the application class and turns on <code><link linkend="no-top-level">no-top-level</link></code> as well.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="include">
    <title>include</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%include</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a from the command-line</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Includes a file to be parsed.  If the path is not absolute (i.e. starting with '/'), then files are searched first in the directory of the currently-executing script (if known), then in each path in the environment variable <code>QORE_INCLUDE_DIR</code>.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="lock-options">
    <title>lock-options</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%lock-options</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--lock-options, -K</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Prohibits further changes to parse options.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="lock-warnings">
    <title>lock-warnings</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%lock-warnings</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--lock-warnings, -A</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_LOCK_WARNINGS">PO_LOCK_WARNINGS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Prohibits further changes to the warning mask.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="new-style">
    <title>new-style</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%new-style</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--new-style, -n</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>PO_NEW_STYLE</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Sets both <code><link linkend="allow-bare-refs">%allow-bare-refs</link></code> and <code><link linkend="assume-local">%assume-local</link></code>.  These two options together make programming in Qore superficially more like programming in C++ or Java programs; use this if you dislike programming with the <code>'$'</code> sign, for example.</para>
	  <para>Since Qore 0.8.1.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-child-restrictions">
    <title>no-child-restrictions</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-child-restrictions</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-child-restrictions, -I</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_CHILD_PO_RESTRICTIONS">PO_NO_CHILD_PO_RESTRICTIONS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Allows child program objects to have parse option restrictions that are not a strict subset of the parents'.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-class-defs">
    <title>no-class-defs</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-class-defs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-class-defs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_CLASS_DEFS">PO_NO_CLASS_DEFS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows new class definitions.  Any use of the reserved word <command>class</command> will result in a parse exception.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-constant-defs">
    <title>no-constant-defs</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-constant-defs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-constant-defs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_CONSTANT_DEFS">PO_NO_CONSTANT_DEFS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows new constant definitions.  Any use of the reserved word <command>const</command> will result in a parse exception.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-database">
    <title>no-database</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-database</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-database, -D</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_DATABASE">PO_NO_DATABASE</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to database functionality.  Currently this means that access to the <link linkend="Datasource_Class">Datasource</link>, <link linkend="DatasourcePool_Class">DatasourcePool</link>, and <link linkend="SQLStatement_Class">SQLStatement</link> classes is restricted.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-external-info">
    <title>no-external-info</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-external-info</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-external-info</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_EXTERNAL_INFO">PO_NO_EXTERNAL_INFO</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows any access to functionality that provides external information.</para>

	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-external-info</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getuid">getuid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="geteuid">geteuid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getgid">getgid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getegid">getegid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getpid">getpid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getppid">getppid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="gethostname">gethostname()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="gethostbyname">gethostbyname()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="gethostbyaddr">gethostbyaddr()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="gethostbyaddr_long">gethostbyaddr_long()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="gethostbyname_long">gethostbyname_long()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getcwd">getcwd()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getcwd2">getcwd2()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getpwuid">getpwuid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getpwuid2">getpwuid2()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getpwnam">getpwnam()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getpwnam2">getpwnam2()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getgrgid">getgrgid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getgrgid2">getgrgid2()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getgrnam">getgrnam()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getgrnam2">getgrnam2()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-external-process">
    <title>no-external-process</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-external-process</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-external-process, -E</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_EXTERNAL_PROCESS">PO_NO_EXTERNAL_PROCESS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows any access to external processes.</para>

	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-external-process</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Backquote_Operator">backquote operator</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="system">system()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="kill">kill()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="exec">exec()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="backquote">backquote()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-filesystem">
    <title>no-filesystem</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-filesystem</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-filesystem, -F</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_FILESYSTEM">PO_NO_FILESYSTEM</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows any access to the external filesystem.</para>

	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-filesystem</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="Dir_Class">Dir</link> class</para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="File_Class">File</link> class</para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="FtpClient_get">FtpClient::get()</link> method</para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="FtpClient_put">FtpClient::put()</link> method</para></entry></row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="chdir">chdir()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="chmod">chmod()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="chown">chown()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="getcwd">getcwd()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="getcwd2">getcwd2()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="glob">glob()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="hlstat">hlstat()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="hstat">hstat()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_bdev">is_cdev()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_cdev">is_bdev()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_dev">is_dev()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_executable">is_executable()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_dir">is_dir()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_file">is_file()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_pipe">is_pipe()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_link">is_link()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_readable">is_readable()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_socket">is_socket()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="is_writeable">is_writeable()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="lchown">lchown()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="lstat">lstat()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="mkdir">mkdir()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="mkfifo">mkfifo()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
<!--
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="mknod">mknod()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
-->
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="readlink">readlink()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="rename">rename()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="rmdir">rmdir()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="stat">stat()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="unlink">unlink()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-global-vars">
    <title>no-global-vars</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-global-vars</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-global-vars, -G</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_GLOBAL_VARS">PO_NO_GLOBAL_VARS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows the use of global variables.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-gui">
    <title>no-gui</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-gui</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-gui, --set-parse-option=no-gui, -pno-gui</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_GUI">PO_NO_GUI</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows the use of functionality that draws graphics to the display (this functionality is not implemented in the qore library; only implemented in modules).</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-locale-control">
    <title>no-locale-control</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-locale-control</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-locale-control, -P</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_LOCALE_CONTROL">PO_NO_LOCALE_CONTROL</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to functions that would affect the current process.</para>
	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-locale-control</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="TimeZone::set">TimeZone::set()</link> static method</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="TimeZone::setUTCOffset">TimeZone::setUTCOffset()</link> static method</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="TimeZone::setRegion">TimeZone::setRegion()</link> static method</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-namespace-defs">
    <title>no-namespace-defs</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-namespace-defs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-namespace-defs, -M</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_NAMESPACE_DEFS">PO_NO_NAMESPACE_DEFS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows new namespace definitions.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-network">
    <title>no-network</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-network</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-network, -Y</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_NETWORK">PO_NO_NETWORK</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows any access to the network.</para>

	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-network</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="FtpClient_Class">FtpClient</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="HTTPClient_Class">HTTPClient</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Socket_Class">Socket</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-new">
    <title>no-new</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-new</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-new, -N</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_NEW">PO_NO_NEW</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows use of the <link linkend='New_Object_Operator'><command>new</command></link> operator.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-process-control">
    <title>no-process-control</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-process-control</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-process-control, -P</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_PROCESS_CONTROL">PO_NO_PROCESS_CONTROL</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to functions that would affect the current process.</para>
	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-process-control</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="abort">abort()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="fork">fork()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="exec">exec()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="exit">exit()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="remove_signal_handler">remove_signal_handler()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="set_signal_handler">set_signal_handler()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="setegid">setegid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="seteuid">seteuid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="setgid">setgid()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="setsid">setsid()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="setuid">setuid()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="sleep">sleep()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="srand">srand()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row><entry><para><link linkend="umask">umask()</link></para></entry></row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="usleep">usleep()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-subroutine-defs">
    <title>no-subroutine-defs</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-subroutine-defs</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-subroutine-defs, -S</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_SUBROUTINE_DEFS">PO_NO_SUBROUTINE_DEFS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows subroutine (function) definitions.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="no-terminal-io">
    <title>no-terminal-io</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-terminal-io</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-terminal-io, --set-parse-option=no-terminal-io, -pno-terminal-io</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_TERMINAL_IO">PO_NO_TERMINAL_IO</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to terminal input and output.</para>
	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-terminal-io</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="flush">flush()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="f_printf">f_printf()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="printf">print()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="printf">printf()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="vprintf">vprintf()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="stdin_constant">stdin</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="stdout_constant">stdout</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="stderr_constant">stderr</link></para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-thread-classes">
    <title>no-thread-classes</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-thread-classes</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-thread-classes</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREAD_CLASSES">PO_NO_THREAD_CLASSES</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to thread classes.</para>
	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-thread-classes</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="AutoGate_Class">AutoGate</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="AutoLock_Class">AutoLock</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="AutoReadLock_Class">AutoReadLock</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="AutoWriteLock_Class">AutoWriteLock</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Condition_Class">Condition</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Counter_Class">Counter</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Mutex_Class">Mutex</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Queue_Class">Queue</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="RWLock_Class">RWLock</link> class</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-thread-control">
    <title>no-thread-control</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-thread-control</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-thread-control, -R</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREAD_CONTROL">PO_NO_THREAD_CONTROL</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to thread control operations.</para>
	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-thread-control</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="Background_Operator"><command>background</command></link> operator</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend='thread_exit_Statements'>thread_exit</link> statement</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="get_thread_data">get_thread_data()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="get_all_thread_data">get_all_thread_data()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="save_thread_data">save_thread_data()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="delete_thread_data">delete_thread_data()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="delete_all_thread_data">delete_all_thread_data()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getAllThreadCallStacks">getAllThreadCallStacks()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="throwThreadResourceExceptions">throwThreadResourceExceptions()</link></para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-thread-info">
    <title>no-thread-info</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-thread-info</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-thread-info</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREAD_INFO">PO_NO_THREAD_INFO</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to functionality that provides information about threading.</para>
	  <table>
	    <title>Unavailable Features with no-thread-info</title>
	    <tgroup cols='1' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
	      <thead>
		<row>
		  <entry><para>Feature/Function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </thead>
	      <tbody>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="gettid">gettid()</link> function</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="num_threads">num_threads()</link> function</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="thread_list">thread_list()</link> function</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="get_thread_data">get_thread_data()</link> function</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="get_all_thread_data">get_all_thread_data()</link> function</para></entry>
		</row>
		<row>
		  <entry><para><link linkend="getAllThreadCallStacks">getAllThreadCallStacks()</link> function</para></entry>
		</row>
	      </tbody>
	    </tgroup>
	  </table>

	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-threads">
    <title>no-threads</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-threads</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-threads, -T</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_THREADS">PO_NO_THREADS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows access to all thread control operations and thread classes (equivalent to <code><link linkend="no-thread-control">no-thread-control</link></code> and <code><link linkend="no-thread-classes">no-thread-classes</link></code> together).</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="no-top-level">
    <title>no-top-level</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%no-top-level</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--no-top-level, -L</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_NO_TOP_LEVEL_STATEMENTS">PO_NO_TOP_LEVEL_STATEMENTS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Disallows top level code.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>
  <sect1 id="require-our">
    <title>require-our</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%require-our</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--require-our, -O</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_REQUIRE_OUR">PO_REQUIRE_OUR</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Requires global variables to be declared with <command>our</command> prior to use (recommended to use for all larger scripts/programs).</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="require-prototypes">
    <title>require-prototypes</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%require-prototypes</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--require-prototypes</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_REQUIRE_PROTOTYPES">PO_REQUIRE_PROTOTYPES</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Requires <link linkend="Data_Type_Declarations">type declarations</link> for all function and method parameters and return types.  Variables and object members do not need to have type declarations with this option.</para>
	  <para>See also <link linkend="require-types">require-types</link>, which is a superset of this option.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="require-types">
    <title>require-types</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%require-types</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--require-types</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_REQUIRE_TYPES">PO_REQUIRE_TYPES</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Requires <link linkend="Data_Type_Declarations">type declarations</link> for all function and method parameters, return types, variables, and object members.</para>
	  <para>See also <link linkend="require-prototypes">require-prototypes</link>, which is a subset of this option.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="requires">
    <title>requires</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%requires</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--load, -l</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>n/a</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Loads a Qore module immediately.  The parse directive can be used to load a module during parsing, and the command-line version can be used to load a module before parsing.</para>
	  <para>From Qore 0.7.1, you can specify a comparison operator (one of &lt; &lt;=, =, &gt;=, or &gt;) and version information after the module name as well.  Version numbers are compared via integer comparisons of each element, where elements are separated by a '.'.  If one of the versions does not have as many elements as another, the missing elements are assumed to be '0' (i.e. version &quot;1.0&quot; compared with version &quot;1.0.1&quot; will be exteneded to &quot;1.0.0&quot;).</para>
	  <para>For example:</para>
	  <programlisting>%requires oracle >= 1.0.1</programlisting>
	  <para>This will load the oracle module if it is at least version 1.0.1.</para>
	  <para>Note that there is one special feature name: &quot;qore&quot;.  This pseudo-feature can be used to check the minimum qore version; if this feature is requested with version information, then the Qore library's version information is used for the version number comparison.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="set-time-zone">
    <title>set-time-zone</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%set-time-zone</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--time-zone, -z</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>none; this is set by calling <link linkend="TimeZone::setRegion">TimeZone::setRegion()</link> or <link linkend="TimeZone::setUTCOffset">TimeZone::setUTCOffset()</link></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Sets the time zone for the current program from a UTC offset (with format '+/-00[:00[:00]]'; ':' characters are optional) or a time zone region name (ex: 'Europe/Prague').</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="strict-args">
    <title>strict-args</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Directive</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>%strict-args</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Command-Line</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code>--strict-args</code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Parse Option Constant</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para><code><link linkend="PO_STRICT_ARGS">PO_STRICT_ARGS</link></code></para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>Description</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Prohibits access to builtin functions and methods flagged with <code><link linkend="RT_NOOP_flag">RT_NOOP</link></code> and also causes errors to be raised if excess arguments are given to functions that do not access excess arguments.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </sect1>

</chapter>
